---
title: The Beginnings of a Project
date: 2023-03-29 22:09:12 -0700
categories: [roadmap, goals]
tags: [tasks, proposals, techniques] #TAG names should always be lowercase
---
# Human DNA Damage Microscopy Project Plan
authors: Lauren Sanders & Nadia Ahmed

## 1. Preprocessing & Evaluation of Preprocessing Pipeline:
### Definition of Done:
Evaluating and choosing the optimal preprocessing pipleine for human cell images for each method outlined below.
#### Raw Data:
- FITC.ics: shows fluourescent DNA damage points over 20 Z-indices at multiple depths
- DAPI.tif: nuclear shape outline staining
- 2 channel FITC.ics + DAPI.tif
#### Preprocessing
FITC.ics data contains 20 Z-indices at multiple depths.
- Collapse multiple depth into one maximum intensity projection
- OR treat each depth as a separate channel: 20 FITC.ics + 1 DAPI.tif
#### Augmentations
- Which augmentations make physical sense?

## 2. Evaluate Utility of Self-Supervised-Learner (SSL) For Biological DNA Damage Microscopy Images:
### Definition of Done:
Serve images from data pipeline to SSL model and assess the performance of a radiation type classifier. Perform explainable AI (xAI) analysis of results. If the accuracy is low (<50%) then other methods should be considered. Task should have adequate documentation.

#### Baseline: FITC Classifier for Radiation Type (Gamma vs Fe in human/Xray vs Fe in mouse)
- Performance evaluation (all data are already labeled)
- xAI (saliency maps, GradCAM, etc)
- Inferences on other radiation types (i.e. Ar vs Si) depending on performance.
  
#### DAPI Classifier for Radiation Type
Does the shape of the nucleus change with respect to radiation type enough to be picked up by a neural network?
- Performance evaluation
- xAI

#### DAPI + FITC Classifier for Radiation Type
Include nuclear shape and DNA damage fluorescence and assess classifier.
- Performance evaluation
- xAI

## 3. Graph Neural Networks/Graph Convolutional Networks (GNNs/GCNs):
If SSL has poor performance, change the representation of the data into a graph instead of an image.Here the pixels are represented as nodes and the distances between them are values.
### Definition of Done:
Proof of concept implementation of GNN with adequate documentation.

#### Preprocessing
Approach changes the pipeline design:
 - Take a corpus of images and cluster by images
 - Start with a single image, tile and cluster the features of the images
 - Combine features across images and cluster features across all images

#### Modeling
- Generic Autoencoder (AE): Baseline to assess clusterability.
  - Performance evaluation: Map the metadata/experimental factors back onto the clusters to see whether the images are clusterign with respect to a specific factor/variable.
  - Optional: Evaluate SSL + GNNs (based on how tight the clusters are in AE)

## 4. 3D Reconstruction of Microscopy Z-stacks:
Use the index information in the FITC to create 3D reconstructions of all the nuclei. Look for tracs that were collapsed in maximum intensity projections but are actually tracks through the cell. Cluster images to see which are similar. Other downstream applications TBD.

## 5. Generative Flow Networks:
Works well for protein folding/other biological use cases. Will be interesting to try if time allows. Evaluate applicability to biological microscopy images; develop appropriate preprocessign pipeline.

## 6. Motion Trackign Using Time as a Covariate:
Utilize the time from exposure variable (4h, 24h, 48h). Identify tracks which are linear in one timeframe and shifted around to look like a spot from a microscope's perspective.

* NOTE: Only 4h human data are on SMCE. Mouse benchmark dataset does have time variable information on AWS.

## Graph Neural Networks (NN): 
If the SSL has poor performance, the next step is to explore graph neural networks (NN). Change the image representation to a graph, where pixels are nodes and distances between them are values. Deciding on preprocessing and graph approach is important. Options include starting with a corpus of images, clustering those images, or starting with one image and clustering the features of the images. A generic autoencoder with graph NNs can serve as a baseline for clusterability. The SSL with graph NNs can also be evaluated.

## 3D Reconstruction of Microscopy Z-Stacks: 
This step involves using the index information in the FITC to create 3D reconstructions of all the nuclei. Cluster images to see which are similar. Other downstream applications are to be determined.

## Generative Flow Networks: 
If time allows, generative flow networks can be explored, as they work well for protein folding and other biological use cases. The applicability to biological microscopy images should be evaluated, and an appropriate preprocessing pipeline developed.

## Motion Tracking Using Time as a Covariate: 
This step involves utilizing the time from exposure variable to identify tracks that are linear in one timeframe and shifted around to look like a spot from the microscope’s perspective.

